 Well, welcome to the Arizona Cancer Evolution Center's monthly discussion series on cancer and the nature of life. And we've got a great talk for you today, The Electric Life of Cancer. Our speaker is Mike Levin, Vannevar Bush Professor of Biology at Tufts University. And I know he's got a few other titles too. Mike leads a research group that studies how complex tissues process information to perform self-assembly and repair, including, intriguingly, the use of electrical networks that make decisions about growth and form. And with him will be Paul Davies. Paul is a Regents Professor of Physics at ASU and Director of the Beyond Center for Fundamental Concepts in Science. He served as a principal investigator of ASU's Center for the Convergence of Physical Science and Cancer Biology. And he's interested in deep evolutionary roots of cancer. And his book Demon in the Machine touches many of the topics that we'll be talking about today. So this is the order. Mike will talk first, followed by a discussion with Paul, and then questions from the audience. And so can you please use the Q&A function to ask your questions, and then we'll gather them together and put them to you. So I'm just going to turn it over now to Mike. Mike. Thank you so much. It's a real pleasure to be here. I'm very pleased to be able to share some thoughts with you. Hopefully you can see the slides. And if you're interested in getting further into the details of what I'm about to show you, you can find all that information and lots more at these websites. So I'd like to talk about cancer as a kind of disease of geometry. And I'll explain what I mean by that. Here's a simple question. We don't have a problem of robots getting cancer. Why is that? Well, fundamentally, it's because most of our technology today is a flat architecture where if there is some kind of intelligent behavior in the large scale machine, the individual pieces don't have that. So it's made basically of more or less passive components. And all of the intentionality is present in the larger scale machine. Biology isn't like that. Biology operates on a multi-scale competency architecture, which means that all the way from the molecular networks, the subcellular components, tissues and organs and organisms, and then of course swarms, every level of this biological organization has its own agenda. They all solve problems. They have a kind of minimal cognition where in various kinds of problem spaces, they are able to pursue local appropriate goals at different degrees of sophistication. And this, while it enables the amazing capabilities of multicellular life, is also why we have this problem of cancer. So what I'm going to tell you today is that as it turns out, all cells, not just neurons, communicate as electrical networks that process information. And this enables us to detect, induce and now even normalize cancer by manipulating the electrical signals that allow cells to cooperate towards large scale anatomical goals. And to see what I mean, we can start by looking at individual cells. So this is a creature known as a lacrimaria. And you can see the fact that this organism has all of its local needs under control. So it's metabolic, it's morphological, it's behavioral needs. You can handle this at the single cell level. There's no brain, there's no nervous system. So we have to start with the understanding that individual cells are highly competent, right? And actually the fact that they even work together to form large scale structures already requires explanation. So the real question isn't why do we have cancer? The real question is, why is there ever anything other than independent cell behavior? This is an early embryo. So we all start life as a set of embryonic cells. And this is a cross section through a human torso. So look at the incredible order here, right? The invariant positioning, size, shape, orientation, everything is in the right place next to the right thing. Where does this pattern actually come from? How is it that these cells can cooperate to build with very high reliability to build exactly this? Now, you might be tempted to say that DNA is where this information is stored, but we can now read genomes. And we know that genomes don't directly mention any of this. Genomes specify the micro level hardware that every cell gets to have. So the proteins of every cell. But we still need to understand how cells communicate and cooperate to build one thing rather than another. And how do they know when to stop growing? How can we communicate to them that when something is missing, let's say a piece of this has been damaged, how do we get those cells to rebuild? And what happens when this incredible process of working towards a complex anatomical goal breaks down? And one of the things that happens is cancer. So this is a very fundamental problem. And it's important to realize that there are many knowledge gaps currently in the field, despite all of the progress in molecular biology and genetics. Here's one typical example of that. So this is the larva of a salamander, known as an axolotl, and baby axolotls have legs. This is an embryo of the frog. And frog tadpoles don't have legs. And one can imagine, as we have done in our lab, making something called a frogolotl, which consists of some amount of embryonic axolotl cells, some amount of frog cells, and they cooperate just fine, they build a frogolotl. Now, we have the genome of the axolotl, we have the genome of the frog. Do we know ahead of time whether frogolotls will have legs? And if they do have legs, will those legs be made entirely of axolotl cells? Or will they include some frog cells? And the point is, there's no predictive structure that you can use, even though you have all the genomic information, we currently don't have any models that can answer questions like this. And so there's a really a fundamental knowledge gap still around pattern control. How are individual cellular decisions harnessed towards large scale anatomical goals, like these amazing bodies here. And this is a fundamental problem, because just think, if we could answer this question, the answer to this one question would solve almost every aspect of medicine, the exception of infectious disease, everything else, birth defects, traumatic injury, cancer, degenerative disease, aging, and even creation of novel structures via synthetic bioengineering would be solved, if we could tell cells what it is that we want them to build, in other words, of new organs of proper functionality. Now, the amazing thing about embryonic development is that while this process of generating form is reliable, it is not hardwired. And you can see that by looking at what some other animals can do. This is a salamander, known as an axolotl. These animals regenerate their legs, their eyes, their jaws, their tails, including spinal cord, portions of the heart and brain. And what happens is that if this animal loses its limb, and this can be anywhere along the length, what the cells will do is very rapidly grow to rebuild that structure, and then they stop. This is the most amazing aspect of regeneration. How do they know when to stop? Because they stop when a correct salamander arm has been completed. So this is clearly some sort of error minimization scheme. They're able to detect the deviation and to continue working until that is corrected. The champions of that process are these. These are planaria, the flatworms with a true brain, lots of internal organs, same neurotransmitters that you and I have. And the amazing thing about planaria is several things. One is that you can chop them into pieces, and each piece and the record is something like 275 pieces. Each piece knows exactly what to rebuild to make a perfect little worm. In fact, while the new heads and tails are built, the remaining fragment actually scales down so that everything is properly proportioned when it's done. These animals not only don't normally get cancer, but they are also immortal. There's no such thing as an old planarian. They have no obvious life limit. Whatever is senescent drops off and the animal simply regenerates it. And you can already see that this is a complex problem of cell-to-cell communication because if you cut one of these planaria in half, the back end here needs to grow a tail. The front half here needs to grow a head. So completely different anatomical structures. These cells were direct neighbors when you separated them with the scalpel. In other words, they can't tell what they should do simply from their position. They have to talk to the rest of the tissue to make decisions about, well, we don't have a head yet, we need to grow a head and so on. So that sort of thing is absolutely critical. It should be noted that regeneration is not just for so-called lower animals. So the human liver is highly regenerative. Even the ancient Greeks knew that somehow. Deer every year regenerate large amounts of antlers. This is bone that grows at the rate of a centimeter and a half per day. So bone, vasculature, innervation, skin. And even human children can regenerate their fingertips below a certain age. So we really need to understand this. Where does all this stand? Well, we are very good at manipulating cells and molecules. So we're very good at getting this kind of information. Which genes turn other genes on and off? What proteins control which genes? What proteins interact with each other? We're very good at getting that kind of hardware information. We're actually a really long way from understanding how these collectives decide what to make, when to stop, and actually resolve all kinds of novel problems, which we'll talk about momentarily. So this here is what computer programming looked like in the 40s and 50s. And the important thing here is that in order to get this machine to do something different, she is literally rewiring it. She's physically changing the structure of the machine. And this is where most of molecular medicine is today. All of our efforts are focused on things like CRISPR, genome editing, changing molecular pathways, protein engineering. It's all basically stuck at the level of hardware. And so what we would like to do now is to really understand how can we take advantage of the software of life, the actual physiological decision making that goes on that we could exploit for purposes of medicine. And I'm talking about the intelligence and the decision making of these cells. And I mean those terms exactly. Cells form a kind of collective intelligence in the sense of that we're used to thinking about swarms of bees and ants and things like this as collective intelligences. We're actually we're all collective intelligences. We're all made of parts. I want to show you an example of biological problem solving. So this is a tadpole of the frog. So here's one eye, here's the other eye, here's the brain, the gut, and the nostrils. And these tadpoles need to become frogs. And in order to become frogs, the tadpole face has to change. So the jaws have to come out, the eyes have to move forward, everything has to change. And it was thought originally that what the genome of the frog somehow does is encode a hardwired set of movements. After all, all the tadpoles, all normal tadpoles look the same. And so if you just move every piece in the right direction, the right amount, you get a normal frog. So to check for the plasticity of this process, we created what we call Picasso tadpoles. So everything is in the wrong place. The eyes on the back of the head, the jaws are off to the side, everything is moved. And the amazing thing is that these animals become largely normal frogs, because all of the different organs will move in novel unnatural paths and continue to keep moving. In fact, sometimes they go too far and actually have to double back a little bit, they will keep moving until they get to a correct frog face. And this is the remarkable thing about this is it matches a very nice definition of intelligence by William James, which basically said that intelligence is the ability to reach the same goal by different means. So as the configuration of the head changes, as the starting position changes in a way that is completely unexpected and abnormal, these cells and tissues figure out what to do in order to move around and get to their goal, which is a particular region of the space of all possible configurations. This is called morphous space or anatomical morphous space. And they make a proper head. And so what evolution actually gives us is not a set of hardwired movements, but the genome actually specifies a machine that's able to minimize error from a kind of specification. And so what is really critical about this phenomenon is that it's in cybernetic terms, it's a process that has a goal. It has a goal because it will keep working and keep spending energy until a particular condition is satisfied. That goal here is the creation of a particular anatomical structure. So what you can see actually is that the size of goals scales. So while individual cells are mainly concerned with very small scale cell level goals, metabolic states, pH, hunger level, things like that, collections of cells are able to work towards very large goals. Like upkeep of a whole limb. Individual cells have no idea what a limb is or how long a finger is, but the collective does. The collective intelligence is able to manage this very large goal. But as much as these goals scale up during evolution, they can also scale down. So this is glioblastoma cells. These are cancer cells. And what happens is that when cells are disconnected, and we'll get more into this momentarily, when cells disconnect from the electrical network that allows the group to maintain a large state, such as a shape of a tissue or an organ, to maintain that tissue memory, they will go back and they basically roll back to an ancient unicellular lifestyle, where the rest of the body is just outside environment to them. They are going to do what all single cells want to do, which is to reproduce and become multiple cells and go wherever life is good. So fundamentally, one can think about the problem of cancer as the shrinking of the goal state from something very large to something quite small. And we can understand here that cancer cells from this perspective are not more selfish. It's just that their cells are smaller. So these cells are perfectly selfish and they compete with other organs in the body to make this nice limb. And here these cells do exactly the same thing. It's just that the boundary of the self is much, much smaller here. So what we would like to do is to understand how do we reconnect cells to these larger scale structures so that they can pursue a patterning program instead of a single cell program. And in particular, we asked what are the signals that keep individual subunits working towards a larger scale goal. Now in the body, it looks like this. Every cell is sitting in this morphogenetic field of information. Some of that information is chemical, some of it is biomechanical, and some of it is bioelectrical. And bioelectricity is special because evolution long ago, around the time of bacterial biofilms, evolution noticed that electricity was an amazingly good way to scale up computations and the kinds of goals that these systems pursue. And in particular, the brain, of course, is a great inspiration for this because there you see exactly what happens. A collection of individual cells, neurons, are bound together into electrical networks that can pursue long-term memory prediction, goal-directed activity, and so on. So let's look how this works. So in the brain, the hardware looks like this. There are large numbers of these cells connected in networks. Each of these cells, each of these neurons has ion channel proteins on their surface. Because these channels can pass charged molecules, sodium, potassium, chloride, and so on in and out, there ends up a voltage gradient across this membrane. That electrical potential can be propagated to their neighbors through these little conduits called the gap junctions. And so there's an electrical state. It can propagate and thus flow in various complex ways through the network, which represents computations. And those computations are a kind of electrical software. This is imaging done by this group, beautiful imaging of a living zebrafish brain, while the zebrafish is thinking about whatever it is that zebrafish think about. And the commitment of neuroscience is that this electrical activity is what holds the cognition of that animal. So whatever memories, plans, preferences, whatever else it has, if we knew what we were doing, we could decode this electrical activity and we would know what those things are. And so there's this goal of neural decoding to be able to read the electrical activity of the brain and to know what the animal is thinking about. So it turns out, for very good evolutionary reasons, that actually every cell in your body does this. So neurons did not invent this trick from scratch. They basically just speed optimized things that your cells were doing long before we had brains or neurons. So every cell in your body has ion channels. Most of them have gap junctions to their neighbors. And one can think about doing exactly the same thing in the body that neuroscientists have been trying to do in the brain. To read the electrical activity and to try to decode it to ask what is the collective thinking, in this case, the electrical activity is literally the memory medium of the collective intelligence of cells. The same way that electrical activity in the brain is the memory medium of the collective intelligence of neurons. Same thing. So let's look at some of these patterns. This is a pattern discovered by my colleague, Danny Adams, where we call this the electric face. And when she was postdoc in my lab, she used voltage sensitive fluorescent dyes for the first time to look at this frog embryo as it was putting its face together. And what you can see is that this is one frame from that video. What you can see is that even before the genes come on that are going to pattern this face into the various organs, already you can see that this tissue already has a pre-pattern, a memory of where everything is going to go. So here's the animal's right eye. This is where it's going to be. Here's where the mouth is going to be. Here are the plaque codes. And the way we make those Picasso tadpoles, I showed you a minute ago, is simply by changing the bioelectrical states, which I'll tell you shortly how I do that. We change the bioelectrical states, which then causes the cells to have a different pattern of what they should be building and they build something completely different. So this is a normal instructive pattern, which is absolutely required for normal development. And in fact, humans with channelopathies often have craniofacial defects for exactly that reason where the electric face pattern is disrupted. This is an endogenous pattern. What you're seeing here is a pathological pattern. This animal was injected with a human oncogene. It's going to make a tumor. The tumor is going to metastasize. But even before the tumor becomes visually apparent, you can already see using this voltage sensitive fluorescent dye that these cells have an aberrant electrical potential. They've closed their gap junctions. They've disconnected from the rest of the grid. And they're basically just reverting back to their ancient unicellular self. So this has obvious implications for a diagnostics modality. So we developed some tools to work with this. One is, of course, the use of these voltage sensitive fluorescent dyes. This is an early frog embryo. It's a time lapse of about, oh, probably about eight hours, where you get to see all of the electrical conversations that the cells are having with each other as if they were neurons, as if this was a brain. But this tissue is able to figure out who's going to be head, tail, left, right, dorsal, ventral. So we do the imaging. Then we do a lot of computational modeling to say, okay, if we know what the channels are, can we guess what the different voltages are going to be and why the voltages are what they are? And then the most important thing is, so this is about reading and understanding the electrical patterns in the tissue. Now, of course, what we want to do is to be able to rewrite them. So in order to rewrite them, we really only have two tricks, both borrowed from neuroscience. Here's a particular tissue. And what we can do is we can control these electrical synapses using either drugs or modifying the gap junctions in various ways, or we can directly open and close the ion channels and thus change the voltage of each cell. So I can either control who talks to whom, or I can control what is the state of various cells. And we don't use any applied electric fields. There are no magnetics. There are no waves. There are no frequencies. This is only molecular physiology. This is targeting the native machinery that these cells use to set up and communicate their signals. Okay. So when we do this, and you can use optogenetics, you can use all the techniques of neuroscience. What happens when you do this? Well, here's just one example. One example is that we saw what it is that triggers eye formation in the head, and that's a particular bioelectrical pattern. And we can induce that pattern by injecting RNA and coding a particular potassium channel somewhere else. Let's introduce that pattern into the gut. So here's the animal's gut. We injected those cells with a particular ion channel. And here, what you can see is they built a very nice eye out of gut cells, because that pattern is what tells the cells what they should be building. Now, if you section these eyes, they have the same lens, retina, optic nerve. They have all the right components. And there are two amazing things about this. One is that we didn't have to specify all the details of how you build an eye. This is basically a subroutine call, a trigger that says to these cells, build an eye here. All the downstream, the molecular genetics that operates downstream, all the eye-specific genes, everything else is turned on. So this is a trigger of a module. The other thing is that there are two levels of instruction here. The first level is that these blue cells, this is a lens sitting out in the flank of a tadpole somewhere. The blue cells are the ones whose voltage we modified with these ion channels, but there wasn't enough of them to make a lens. And so what they did was that they recruited a bunch of their neighbors, the neighbors that we didn't directly modify at all. And so the first level of instruction is us telling these cells, you need to make an eye. And the second level of instruction is these cells recruiting a bunch of their neighbors to say that, well, there's not enough of us. You need to help out. We're going to all work together to make this eye. So there's communication from us, and then there's the communication between the cells. Now, I want to show you one other quick example of what I mean by pattern memory, by this kind of bioelectrical pattern memory. Here's one of these flatworms. Here's a planarian. The gene expression for head genes are in the anterior like it should be. And if you amputate the head and the tail, this middle fragment will give you a perfectly normal one-headed, one-tailed worm 100% of the time. It's extremely stable. Now, here's another one-headed worm, same gene expression. Everything is fine. But when we cut this worm, we get two-headed animals. Why would we get two-headed animals? So I just told you, it's a very reliable process. And that's because in the meantime, we figured out this electrical circuit that determines, enables the cells to know how many heads a planarian is supposed to have. And when we modify this electrical pre-pattern, that normally says one head, one tail, we can modify it to say two heads. It's a little bit messy. The technology is still being worked out. But when you do that, this piece will end up making two heads. And now here's the really critical part of this. This bioelectrical pattern is not a read out of this two-headed animal. This bioelectrical pattern is a read out of this perfectly normal anatomy of this one-headed animal. That means that a one-headed body, a normal body can store at least one of two different pictures of what a correct planarian looks like. It's a memory. In fact, it's a counterfactual memory. It's not true now. This animal doesn't have two heads now. But what it does have is a representation of a planarian that is going to have two heads if it gets injured. So it's a kind of latent memory that doesn't act. I mean, the animal doesn't do anything until it gets injured. When it gets injured, that's when the cells consult this memory and decide that now they're going to need to build two heads. And the other reason I call this a memory is that if you then take these two-headed animals and start cutting them in plain water, no more manipulation, they will continue to make two-headed animals in perpetuity forever. And then we now know how to set them back to one-headed. So let's take stock of what we have. And here's a video if you want to know what these things do in their spare time. This is two-headed animals hanging out. So let's just take stock of what we have. First of all, you can convert an animal into a one-headed form or a two-headed form without touching the genome. There's no genomic editing. The genotype is wild type. There is this electrical memory. It has all the properties of memory. It's long-term stable. It's rewritable or labile. It has conditional recall or latency, which I just showed you. And it has these discrete possible memories, one head, two heads. So the answer to the question, what determines the number of heads in the planarian is a little tricky. It's not specifically in the DNA. What the DNA gives you is a machine with an electrical circuit that reliably by default generates a pattern that encodes one head. But it also has a learning capacity where you can modify that memory directly, kind of like memory inception as neurosciences do. And you can modify that memory directly, and then it will have two heads. So the question, what controls the heads is actually the state of the electrical pattern memory that the cells use to figure out what to do when they get injured. In fact, not only can you get ectopic heads on one animal, you can get heads that are appropriate to other species. So here's one planarian type with a triangular head. If we amputate the head, and for about 48 hours, we use a drug that prevents the cells from communicating with each other electrically. Then we pull them out of the drug, let the electric circuit settle down to a stable state. And sometimes about 8% of the time it settles down into the correct attractor, and you get your normal head. But other times, you get a round head like us Mediterranean, or you get a flat head like a peafelina. They regrow the heads of other species without any genomic changes, so the genome is still the same. In fact, they have the head shapes and the stem cell distributions of these other species. So in the morphous space of all possible planarian heads, there are certain attractors that are reachable by specific dynamics of the electrical circuit. And you can knock a perfectly genetically normal animal into these other attractors if you interface with the physiological software directly. Now obviously, this has implications for regenerative medicine. So we're working on, for example, limb regeneration. So normally frogs don't regenerate their limbs. You can induce them to regenerate their limbs with a cocktail that puts these cells into a build a leg here kind of state. Here they turn on pro regenerative genes like MSX1. They start immediately growing. Here's a leg with a toe with toenail and some toes, eventually a very respectable leg that is touch sensitive and motile. So these legs are quite functional. The amazing thing is that the intervention with the bioelectric signal takes place for 24 hours, then we don't touch it again, the legs grow for a year and a half. So it's an early decision point, are we going to grow a leg or not? Once you've shifted them to that decision point, you don't need to do anything else. And we are now doing this. And this is I have to do a disclosure. This is we have David Kaplan and I have a company called a Morphoceuticals Inc. where we are trying to take that technology using a wearable bioreactor that contains the ion channel drugs. And we're trying to induce regeneration of limbs in a mammalian model and hopefully eventually in patients. So what I've told you so far is that just like in the brain, there's a cognitive glue mechanism that binds competent individual cells towards a large scale common purpose, that purpose being organogenesis. And that process, it can solve problems in this morphous space if things are in a different location, if there's not enough cells, too many cells, it's extremely flexible and it uses bioelectrical communication to execute that kind of problem solving. And we can now modify that electrical software in real time, as I've just shown you, controlling the formation of organs, controlling axial body polarity in these planaria without any need for genomic editing of the hardware. So now the all important question, can we harness this approach to control the morphogenetic defections of cancer? I've already shown you that you can use this to diagnose. So these voltage sensitive fluorescent dyes allow us to see the cells before they defect. In fact, one can imagine this is just an artist rendition, but one can imagine a tool like this, augmented reality display, where a doctor will be able to look down onto a tumor during surgery and see where all the metastases and where the margins are and so on by using their bioelectrics. So some of this technology is going to go towards diagnostics. Now, one thing that we've learned is that thinking about the causes of cancer is that this disease does not need to have a genetic component. So for example, here's a normal tadpole, these little black cells are melanocytes, they're pigment cells. This animal where the melanocytes have obviously overgrown like crazy, there's nothing genetically wrong with it. There are no oncogenes, there have been no carcinogens, no radiation. All that's happened is that a particular cell type has been prevented from communicating electrically with its target, and these cells go crazy. In fact, not only do they make the animal very dark, but here in cross section, you can see this is what normal melanocytes look like, small numbers of nice little round cells. Instead, they do this, they become highly arborized, they become these crazy long projections, they dip down into the brain, into the lumen of the neural tube. Basically, they start to invade and metastasize, they fill the blood vessels. So just like melanoma, this is full-on melanoma in an animal that has no mutations and no carcinogenic exposure, and it's triggered by a disruption of electrical coordination among cells. Now, we can do this in, this is also true in human melanocytes and culture, but there's an amazing aspect of this. The effect is not on the cells themselves. So these blue, so this is again a cross section through a tapel, these blue cells are the ones that we targeted with our electrical blocking RNA. These are the melanocytes that converted to melanoma as a result. They're not the same cells. The effect happens at a distance, it actually happens by serotonin, by neurotransmitter signaling. And so now we can see that cancer is fundamentally a physiological disorder of cell organization towards normally coordinated patterning. So of course, the best thing that we want to do as opposed to inducing it, we want to suppress it or normalize it, and we can do that. So in the frog, you can inject these oncogenes, for example, human oncogenes like nasty KRAS mutations, they're labeled in a red fluorescent protein. So here they are, here's the tumor, here's the oncoprotein labeled in red. And if you co-inject an ion channel that prevents these cells from disconnecting electrically from their neighbors, even though the oncoprotein is blazingly strongly expressed here, it is in fact, it's all over the place here, there's no tumor. And it is a very significant reduction of tumor because what matters is the physiology, the physiology trumps the genetic state. Despite the mutation, these cells, when they're connected to their neighbors, will continue to carry out their normal morphogenetic duties. You can do this with ion channels, you can do this with drugs, you can do this with light. So here's an example of using optogenetic kinds of tools, as one does in the nervous system, to control light gated channels and knock down the tumor burden in animals that are bearing really tough KRAS mutations. In fact, we can look at sodium channels, here's a normal tadpole, here's a tumor induced by a particular sodium channel, and just tweaking that sodium channel slightly so that the amount of sodium that gets in is a little different. Instead of a tumor, you get an eye. So the determinant of whether or not a bunch of cells make a tumor or an eye is not anything about their genetics, it's literally environmental, it's the amount of sodium that gets in because the sodium is what controls, and you can do the same thing with potassium and chloride. It's got nothing to do with DNA damage in these cases, it's all about the electrophysiology. And so we've been moving now from the frog, and this is literally, this paper just came out a couple of days ago, this is the work of a number of people led by Juanita Matthews, and it basically takes a bunch of novel uses for ion channel drugs that humans already take. So these are human approved compounds that normally target ion channels, and in rodent and human glioblastoma cells, what they do is they knock down very strongly, they knock down the proliferation of these cells, even after the drug is removed, the cell numbers continue to drop or stay even, and they partially normalize these cells. Here they are turning on, connexin 43 is actually a gap junction. So these, whereas these cells were loners, now they're starting to differentiate, they're starting to connect up to their neighbors again, and they're turning on this tissue. So we're very hopeful for moving this technology from basic science in the frog to some sort of clinical application soon. Okay, so to summarize, cancer can be caused by a disorder of pattern regulation, specifically the ability of cells to cooperate towards large scale organogenesis. Electrical properties now can be used to detect, to induce, and to reprogram these kinds of cells, and the idea is that the behavior of these electrical circuits controls cell behavior and can be modified physiologically, and that we're now looking for and finding pharmacological and light-based strategies to do this. So the future steps of this research program are basically this, we're trying to refine that physiological signature, so to figure out diagnostics for either for surgery or for personal use in scanning cancer screening. We want to refine these voltage control methods for mammalian systems, and the big picture here is to crack this bioelectric code to really understand the mapping between specific patterns of bioelectricity and outcomes such as eye, leg, heart, limb, and so on, so that we can use existing ion channels as a huge toolkit of electroceuticals, so something like 20% of all drugs that people take are in some way ion channel modified drugs, and all of that can be repurposed for modifying the behavior of electrical networks. So in the last few slides, I want to come back out of this sort of medical focus and think about what this means in terms of evolution. I started out by saying that the basic condition of cells is as individual single-celled organisms who are going to try to reproduce and do various things, and it is, multicellularity is a way to harness them and prevent them from doing things and enable them to do other things and really to control them. So let's look at a really very, I think, profound example of this idea of what is the basic state of certain cells. Let's think about skin cells in the embryo. Now, one thing you might think is that the baseline kind of baseline behavior of skin cells is to have a sort of boring two-dimensional life on the outside of the animal, keeping out the bacteria, keep out the pathogens, and just sort of sit there and not do much. And we wanted to think about this in the context of figuring out what genomes actually do, and it's not as obvious as you might think, and also to understand what kind of baseline behaviors in cells are the result of their control by a collective. And so this is largely the work of Doug Blackiston in my group, and he did the following experiment. We took an early frog embryo, we took some of these early skin cells, and we basically set them aside into their own their own little dish. We didn't add anything, we didn't change the genome, we didn't put in new genes or nanomaterials or drugs or anything, but we took something away. What we took away was the rest of the animal. So we basically asked these skin cells to reboot their multicellularity. Now, in the absence of all the normal cells, what do you want to do now? You're free. Now, there's a number of things they could have done. They could have died for lack of proper neighbors. They could have done absolutely nothing and sat there. They could have spread out away from each other. They could have formed a monolayer like a cell culture, and they didn't do any of that. What they did was this. So here they are, here are the cells being put into this little depression, and what they do overnight is they coalesce, they get together, and then they form this interesting round spherical structure, and this, and what you see, the flashes here are calcium signaling. Looks very brain-like. Remember, there's no neurons here. It's just skin, and what this little thing does, which we call them xenobots, a xenobots for Xenopus laevis is the name of the frog. This is what they do. They take the little hairs that skin has on its surface to keep the mucus flowing down the side of the frog, and they use them as little oars to swim along. So they have swimming activity. They can go in circles like this. They can patrol back and forth like this guy. Here's some tracking data on some collective behavior. So here they are. These are interacting with each other. This one is going on some sort of long journey. These are just sitting there doing nothing. So they have a wide range of motile behaviors. Again, just skin. This is what skin does when left to its own devices when it's taken away from the restrictive influence of the rest of the cells. It becomes a novel protoorganism that repurposes its genomically specified hardware for new activities. Here it is in a maze of water. So you can see what it does. It swims along. It's going to take this corner. It doesn't need to bump into the opposite wall. It takes the corner. At this point, for whatever reason that nobody knows, it decides to turn around and go back where it came from. So it just has some sort of internal dynamics that allow it to change its behavior on the fly. So here it is. It's going to go down here, and at this point, it just turns around and goes back. We can use the same technologies with these in terms of calcium imaging and signal analysis to ask what are these cells saying to each other that enable them to make this completely novel protoorganism and what might two xenobots be saying to each other? They have another, I just want to show you one more amazing capacity that they have, which is this. These xenobots don't have the ability to reproduce the way that frogs normally reproduce because all of those types of tissues are gone. So within 48 hours, they discover a new solution to this problem. And the solution is this. If you sprinkle loose skin cells in their vicinity, what they will do is they will run around and they will collect these skin cells into little piles, little balls. They will continue to polish both in groups and individually. They will continue to polish and coalesce these little balls. And you can see them here. And because they're working with these skin cells that are, again, in a gentile material, meaning it's a material with an agenda, it's not a passive material, it's not even merely an active material, what these cells do when you push them into a little ball like this is they become more xenobots. So this is kinematic self replication. Each of these xenobots is making copies of itself, new xenobots out of loose material that it finds in the environment. This is von Neumann's idea for machines that go around and make copies of themselves from materials they find nearby. So they make multiple generations. So each generation of bots does exactly what we as engineers do. They find the loose cells, push them into piles, and then rely on the cells themselves to do the rest. The cells do all the heavy lifting. The engineers and the bots themselves are fairly minor actors in all this. Of course, it doesn't happen without them. But the cells, all of this works because once pushed into piles, the cells know what to do. They become the next generation of xenobots. So this is kinematic self replication. As far as we know, no other animal on earth does this. It's completely novel. So here are some deep implications of this. All of these, what you just saw as a completely normal Xenopus laevis genome. So the frog genome can do one of at least two, probably many more things. They can produce, here's the normal development of the frog, and then here's the kind of behavior, here's tadpoles running around. Or in a different configuration, it can make these xenobots. Now, where did this capacity come from? When we ask why do tadpoles have certain features, like with any life form, the answer is always the same. For millions of years, selection forces shaped it to do this and that so they could survive. Well, there's never been any xenobots. There's never been selection force to be a good xenobot. These cells are able to solve all these problems in novel configurations from scratch. And this is the developmental sequence. I have no idea what this is. Over two months, the xenobots turn into this. This is their developmental sequence. This is them acting in their behaviors. So what we see here is that evolution doesn't just give us solutions to a particular environment, let's say a frog being a solution to a kind of niche where the frogs can prosper. It actually makes a machine that can solve many different kinds of problems and make different kinds of organisms. And the ability of individual cells to work together to make one thing rather than another thing is exactly at the root of not only development, evolution and regeneration, but also cancer. This is really the key to this whole problem, is to understand under what circumstances do cells cooperate to do one thing than another and what is the role of the genome? The genome nails down the hardware for these cells. They have the proteins that they're supposed to have. And then the question is at the level of software, what is that hardware going to do? And the hardware is amazing. Biological hardware is incredibly clever. And we need to take advantage of this collective intelligence to repair it in cases of cancer, as opposed to trying to micromanage from the bottom up the molecular pathways. So I just want to thank the people who did all the work that I showed you today. Here they are amazingly talented postdocs and grad students. I want to thank the animals that we work with. They do all the hard work, our various funders, and again, the disclosures for morphoceuticals. And thank you very much. We can talk about it. Totally amazing, Mike. And I know we've had a couple of comments in the chat saying that it was amazing and people want to watch this again. And I know I certainly do. There's so much there. So I'll turn it over to Paul. Well, let me echo that sentiment Pauline just expressed. Every time I hear about your work, Mike, I am blown away. And I've got a notepad in front of me and it's absolutely covered with questions. And of course, we can only touch on a few things. I suppose the physicist in me always comes to the fore when I hear these accounts and I ask myself, well, what's going on? And to me, the deepest mystery is that clearly, when we're talking about, say, regeneration, that morphologic information, the information about the shape, the size of the human and the set of instructions when it should stop growing, all of that has to come from somewhere. I guess it's stored somewhere, obviously not in genes. It's obviously distributed. And the question is, over what sort of scale? And my first thought is, well, you chop a worm in two, maybe it's just around the wound. But I think that's a bit naive. Are you able to pin down just, does it involve the whole organism or a patch of the organism or have you got anywhere, any idea? Sure. Yeah. Yeah. It absolutely is not just at the wound. And we already know that just from sort of, from very, very simple ancient experiments. And the more modern stuff that we've done shows that it's in fact throughout the whole body. So in a froglet, if you amputate one of the legs, the other leg, and you track bioelectricity, the other leg within 30 seconds lights up at the same location. And you can tell from that signal, you can tell what kind of damage it was and where on the leg it was. So cells across the body know what's going on. When we do our brain repair work, you can do it from the belly side as well as you can from the dorsal side where the brain actually is. So this information spreads throughout the whole body. And we can see it when you look for the bioelectrical patterns, they're quite large. They span the whole body. And because the nice thing about the frog is that from the very first moments of development, the fertilization of the egg, it's right there in front of you. So you can see the patterns form. So we know where they come from. Where they come from is the spontaneous symmetry breaking and self-organization of the electrical circuit that's distributed in a set of cells. So you can imagine, and I have lots of, we have lots of computational models that I can show you that show exactly how this works. When you have a set of cells, let's say a two-dimensional sheet on epithelial tissue, every cell has the exact same electrical circuit dictated by the genetics. But that becomes an excitable medium that will break symmetry and spontaneously self-organize certain kinds of patterns. Which patterns? Well, that is determined by what ion channels they have and what gap junctions they have. And that's what evolution tinkers with. But once you have the correct set of channels, there is a self-organization of a pattern. And the rest of the tissue uses that pattern as a reference point. So error, anatomical deviation from that rough sort of pattern, something's very simple. One head, one tail, that's it. And something's quite complex, like the electric face. All of those are spontaneous self-organization of an electrical circuit with components that were finely honed by evolution. And we're used to people talking about morphogenetic fields. And it goes back to Alan Turing and the assumptions always being that this is chemical gradients that are set up in some way, presumably coupled to, as we would now know, coupled to gene regulatory networks. So you've got chemical networks and you've got gene networks. But you've obviously got electrical networks as well. And I assume the full story would mean understanding how all three of these would couple together, plus possibly mechanical. That's right. That's right. This is absolutely true. Yeah. Irreversibly complex, it seems to me. It is. And the full set of processes from beginning to end encompass electrical signals, biomechanical signals, and molecular types of gradients. But one can ask an interesting question about all of this. One can ask, instead of tracking every single detail that happens here, could we coarse-grain this in an important way? Could we ask, what is the causal structure of this network such that what are the states that have the most bang for your buck in terms of control? I mean, I can go in and I can try to micromanage it by single-handedly directly turning on and off each cell, each gene at the right time. And you could do that. You can micromanage it this way. Or you can ask, what are the master control states that, if I trigger them, will percolate down through the rest of the network and give me the most coherent, powerful anatomical change for the least amount of input? That's how we look at this. Of course, all these things are important. But we want the upstream controller. We don't want to micromanage. We want to know, where is the decision made? And temporally, the decision is made in almost every case that we've studied. It's made in the bioelectric circuit. After injury, in the first three hours, in the worm, for example, in the first three to six hours, the bioelectric circuit makes a decision of what it's going to do. And then over the next 18 to 24 hours, all the gradients become established. All the morphogens, the genes turn on and off, the distinguished head from tail, all that stuff kicks on subsequently. And so in the examples, and I'm not saying it will always be this way, but the examples that we've seen, the bioelectrics gives us a uniquely powerful layer of the system that holds large scale coarse grained states where you don't have to micromanage. I always think of this as this is obviously very, very primitive with respect to the physics, but I always think about this in terms of Boyle's law and things like that versus trying to control where every individual molecule of the gas is going. So the difference being that the biologists today, because of all the fancy high throughput techniques, we're starting to get this idea that maybe we could track every molecule of the gas. And as a result, you could probably watch every gene all the time. Someday that will be possible. And so I think we're missing out on these mesoscale laws that are actually incredibly powerful and hold really the understanding, not just the micro level prediction, but actually the understanding of the rules of the system. Now we've got a lot of questions backing up. Can we go into some of them, Paul? I've got just one more thing I'd like to ask, but I can save it for a little later. Yeah, let's do some of the questions. And we can stay on the line. I know some people will have to go at two o'clock, but we can keep going for a little bit longer. Let's go to Barbara's first one. How are the electrical memories encoded and stored? Yeah, they're stored in the stable state of the electrical circuit. So imagine that you have a tissue, every cell in that tissue has exactly the same ion channels, and they're coupled by gab junctions. So you basically have an excitable medium that has the property that it will store a distribution of resting potential for long periods of time. That's how it's stored. It's stored. It's literally an electrical memory related to memory in the brain, not exactly the same mechanism. And you can see these electrical states. We have very nice computational models that show you how they're stable. And that's what it is. And you can rewrite them at will if you have a computational tool, which we're beginning to build now, that tells you which channels do I need to open and close to change the pattern to a different pattern. Okay. Next one from Sergio. Are you effectively updating the cellular software to recruit current living cells without inducing the formation of new cells? Yeah, depending on which system you're talking about, we can definitely rearrange existing cells. Many of these contexts do involve production of new cells, but that's not necessary. So for example, in the xenobot system, there isn't much cell proliferation. It's what the cells you have are the cells you're working with. In planaria, there are definitely new cells that definitely do appear during the repair process. Okay. So I thought we'd go to one in the chat, and this is from Amin, and he's very complimentary. His talk was amazing. I wonder if there's been any work done on analyzing epron-like properties of cancer cells? I don't know if you know what they are, especially in breast cancer. Yeah, we have done some work, and this is with Madeleine Oudin. We have done some work on the bioelectrics of breast cancer. The one thing to just say is that it's not necessarily the properties of the individual cells. The network is most important, so it's the environment, it's the other cells, and it's the cells that are going to be transformed. So the whole, you have to look at it as a network. But yeah, we have done some work on that. So Michael is saying, how do you control for the effects of autocrine and paracrine chemical cell signaling? Could it be that the electrics are an effect, or the effect or non-effect correlate? Yeah. Well, first of all, absolutely. The autocrine and paracrine and all of the other distribution of morphogens and all of that stuff absolutely happens in the sense that in order to make an eye, you do need to turn on genes that are going to be for beta crystalline, for the lens, and for all these kinds of things. They are all downstream, and we know this because we can very specifically change the voltage using either sodium, potassium, chloride. The channel doesn't really matter. The ion doesn't matter as long as you get the voltage right. When you change the voltage, all of the distribution of the bioelectrics, the downstream genes, we know all the genes that are downstream. We know the distribution of morphogens in many of these cases. All of that stuff will follow hours after you tweak the voltage. Now, sometimes there are feedback loops because some of those things go back in turn and control channel opening and closing. And that actually, the evolution of the system involves back and forth between the electrical and the biochemical. But in every case that we've looked at, and we've even tried cases where we make them fight. So we put in, let's say in human mesenchymal stem cells, we'll put in a chemical inducer of differentiation, but then keep a voltage in the state that says don't differentiate, so try to pit them against each other. In every case that we've seen so far, again, not saying that that's always going to be that way, but this is what we've seen so far. The bioelectrics is the driver and downstream, and the other stuff is downstream, including sometimes feedbacks back. But the bioelectric circuit is the most efficient master regulator of what's going to happen downstream, including all of the autocrine and paracrine signaling. Okay. Ryan, these cancer cells that exist in fully developed tumors and are forced to reconnect to their surrounding tissues. Do we see these cells start to normalize their function, or are they more likely to cease function and self-destruct? Great question. There's much more needs to be done on this. We only have limited information. In the frog, they resume normal function. So they crawl off, they join other tissues, you can track them, they join other tissues, and they have a normal life as other types of tissues. In the human case that we just started looking at in the glioblastoma, some of them turn on senescence markers, and they sort of just quiet down and do nothing. And others turn on differentiation markers, which look like they're on their way to becoming normal neurons. So at this point with the drugs that we have now, which are just the first pass of this, there's kind of a mix of both. There's a kind of quiescence, but also some normalization. Right. And a question from Ashley. Large scale quantum biology? If nonliving systems are non-coherent, entropy, noise, etc., could this be global electric photon coherence, for example? Does fizz pop mean anything? Yeah, I know what you mean. So ultra-weak photon emission and Fritz Albert pop, the kind of stuff that he studied. I think that mode of signaling is very interesting. We don't have any evidence that that's what's going on here. It might, but everything that we've done so far obeys pretty nicely a standard electrophysiology rules that don't really require, at least as far as I can tell for now, they don't require any kind of quantum modifications or taking into account the photons. But who knows what we'll see in the future. I just want to ask my very basic question from right at the start. You've got your planaria and you say if they get damaged, they just develop new parts so that they in effect can't be killed. Is that, that's true. So you can, you know, they just can't die from an accident. They would have to be poisoned, would they? Or how would you kill them? They're not invulnerable. So you can certainly squish one. You know, they can be killed for sure. But the typical, you know, cutting them into pieces doesn't do it. Cutting them, the pieces will continue to regenerate. So literally the record I think is, you know, Thomas Hunt Morgan in 1903 or something cut, there's a paper where he cut them into 275 pieces and those pieces still regenerate. Okay, oh well. So we're going to be carrying on. I just want to tell people what's going to happen in our next talk, which will be in a month's time. And on the 15th of April, so look out for this one. Cancer in our Cancer in the Nature of Life series. It's going to be Can Cancer Jump Species with Michael Metzger. And he's shown that it can actually. He works for, on clams and mussels. Does amazing work. So do come and see that talk on the 15th of April. So thank you and for everyone who's joined. And we're going to carry on for a few minutes because this is so fascinating, if you're willing, Mike. Sure, sure, absolutely. So Paul, would you like to carry on your conversation? Yes, I got, as I said, a whole host of questions, but here's one that I don't expect you know the answer to, Mike, but I think it's interesting thought. So this membrane potential is essential for life that it's achieved normally by pumping ions from the inside of the cell to the outside and these pumps have evolved over billions of years. And so in a normal healthy condition, there'd be what a few hundred millivolts potential difference across the cell membrane. And so what I don't know, be interested to know is the genes that control that process of maintaining the correct potential. Are they very ancient genes? You would expect them to be and would the genes that control it in eukaryotic cells be simply homologues of those ancient ones or more recently evolved? Or do we know anything at all about the genetic backstory underpinning this electrical control? Sure, sure. Extremely ancient genes, extremely ancient. Some of the most well conserved ever. So maybe the most interesting one that you want to think about is called a VATPAs. It's a proton pump. It's found, it's conserved, almost completely conserved everywhere. And if you, once we looked at RNA-seq data, transcriptional profiling data of experiments on regeneration in deer, in axolotl, in zebrafish, in frog and in plants, so across independent origins of multicellularity. When you look at all the genes that are involved in regeneration and all of these across kingdoms, all these different things, there is only one gene that is common to them all that's involved in regeneration. That gene is the VATPAs and it is incredibly ancient. It's what powers, it's related to the mitochondrial energy pump. It runs backwards. It's basically a backwards running version of the mitochondrial energy producing pump. I've got another question from Amin. He's written a few papers, over expression of potassium channel in cancers. Could you kindly comment a little more on that? If so, what's the impression by your response? Yeah. Potassium channels. Yeah. Yeah. So the key, the way we look at this is the key is the status of the cell in the electrical network of the tissue, which is determined by its voltage and its gap junction connectivity. And that in turn is dependent on the various channels that the cell is using. Most mammalian and I guess vertebrate cells in general rely very heavily on potassium channels. Insects sometimes go for chloride and so on. But yeah, potassium channels are really critical and lots of people are now looking at potassium channels as oncogenes and potassium channel drugs as putative cancer drugs. But I think the difference, the one difference between what we're doing and what other people have done on this is that you can treat these channels as a cancer target the way that you would, let's say a transcription factor or any other protein. You might find it upregulated. So you try to knock it down in the tumor, things like that. I think that that approach is going to have a limited value. I think it will work in some cases, but in the end, the problem is that it's still an approach focused on the hardware. The point isn't to get rid of the channel because the channel can be open or closed. And you're going to have some cases where you want the channel open, other cases you're going to want to close. We should not be tracking the expression level or the presence of the channel. We should be tracking the information that it's exchanging with the tissue by virtue of the voltage that that channel produces. It's the physiological state is the trigger, not the presence or the absence of the channel. So I think there's huge opportunities for using potassium channel modulation in terms of drugs, potassium channel targeting in various ways to control that information flow, not just the presence of the gene or the protein, but the information flow. Barbara had an earlier question. Well, Mike answered one of Barbara's questions about the planaria being chopped up through subsequent generations. But she also asked a question that I was going to ask, which is that we've known you for a number of years, Mike, and followed this amazing story. But would you say it's not yet mainstream? And if it's not, shouldn't it be? I have no complaints. We've worked very hard. There are in the current developmental biology textbook, there are three stories now based on the work that we've done. I don't know if it's mainstream. Certainly, the last review I did on this was in cell, which is about as mainstream as it gets. So I have no complaints. I will say that the bioelectrics has gotten a late start. Relative to other aspects of molecular biosciences for a couple of reasons. People actually, the importance of bioelectrics was obvious to people at the turn of the last century. Already, people like Thomas Hunt Morgan and some of the other forefathers of developmental biology were already talking about the importance of currents. But the problem is that unlike molecular biology and biochemistry, where you can take a cell, fractionate it into pieces, pieces, fix it with formaldehyde, take all the proteins, the RNAs, the sugars, everything else, and analyze them in the dead state, bioelectrics doesn't let you do that. The minute the cell dies, this is all gone. So you have to do everything in the living state. That is extremely hard. Only recently, I mean, we basically made the first tools around 2000, we made the first tools to start reading and writing this information in the living state. And prior to that, there were older techniques of electrophysiology and applying currents with electrodes and so on. But the modern tools only appeared relatively recently. And the other thing is that the formalisms needed to understand what's going on here are very multidisciplinary. So much like in neuroscience, you have a multi-scale interpretation issue here. You have to use all kinds of techniques from computer science, from physics, from cognitive science. This is an extremely exciting emerging field. And I think there's going to be way more in the future. But like I said, I have no complaints about where we are now. Pauline, did I get that right? I think you did. Yes, it was very close to the question. I think she might have been implying when she said mainstream, would it be actually be used clinically at some stage? That's what the implication was to me. Well, I mean, at this point, I mean, yes and no, there are numerous ion channel drugs used for various things. They have not yet been used, let's say, for regenerative medicine. That's what we're trying to do now. So we have this company, MorphoCeuticals. That's exactly what it's trying to do. It's trying to really start to deploy these ion channel drugs for purposes of regeneration and cancer as well, and someday birth defects. So I think just starting, we don't have an actual application in patients yet. I think that's been wonderful. And I want to thank you, Mike, on behalf of all of us. It's been the most amazing talk. I'm sure you would agree, Paul. Absolutely. Yes. My notebook is still full of questions. You can deal with those by email. Thank you so much. Thank you, everybody, for all the questions. Yeah, great discussion. Thank you. And if you want more information about Mike's work, go to his website at Tufts University. You'll easily find it. So thank you again. And the recording will be on our website on the Arizona Cancer Revolution website. Great. Yeah. Thank you so much. Thank you, everyone. Good to see you, Mike. Yeah, great to see you. Thanks.